# Reviews from FAL for seds manuscript

Dear Dr. Kenneth Fortino,

please excuse my late response, I was still waiting for a third review...
However, I have now decided that your manuscript still requires some
modifications before it can be published in FAL.
Both reviewers expressed some major concerns and gave numerous detailed
suggestions. Therefore, I will be willed to accept the publication of your
manuscript once you have addressed the points given by the reviewers.

Many thanks and best wishes,
yours sincerely
Hans-Peter Grossart


Review
Reviewer D
2012-10-09 12:18 PM

For author and editor 	Subject: Patterns in the sediment organic matter
content of arctic lakes
General remarks
The manuscript describes the results from a sediment survey covering 22
shallow lakes in Alaska. Despite the LOI content of the sediment some basic
parameter measured in the overlying water are presented. The authors
conclude that benthic primary production is a major source of organic matter
to the sediments.
The Language is OK. The paper is well organized. Considering the quality of
the data the paper is a bit lengthy. A few points (e.g. that organic matter
content decreases with sediment depth) are not very new.
The main problem with the manuscript, however, is that the data do not
really prove the conclusions. Many of the measured environmental variables
(Temperature, O2, Light attenuation) are typically very variable with time.
The measurements thus represent just one arbitrary point in time.
Seasonality is completely ignored (e.g. plankton sucession might influence
light attenuation, etc.). Sediment data on the other hand integrate over the
time span of many years. Calculating regressions between the two types of
data does not make much sense. As long as there are no informations about
temporal changes of environmental factors, the data analysis given in the
paper does not make much sense and the paper cannot be published.
Furthermore, central parameter and processes are only crude (LOI as measure
of organic material) or not measured at all (benthic primary production,
allochtonous carbon input).
I am not an expert in arctic ecology but I would expect the ice cover to
have a very big influence on the processes discussed in this paper (e.g. the
effect of length of ice cover on allochtonous input).
Detailed remarks
L42: The keywords should be reconsidered
L78: The authors are right, that the rates are depending on environmental
factors. This, however, would lead to a purely kinetic effect. If you wait
long enough the same Corg content of the sediment will develop. Thus,
differences in environmental factors would shift the vertical Corg profile
in the sediment up or down – the deeper you go, the less effect of
environmental factors should be visible.
L100-109: The paragraph is difficult to understand for a limnologist. I
suggest the authors give some explanation about ecological consequences of
the location in the two different areas.
L116: The authors should explain in more detail, how they determined the
depth of the shallow samples. Did they just arbitrary try to get sediment as
shallow as possible? What are the reasons that there was an upper limit for
the shallow samples? Was the most shallow part of the lakes rocky or sandy?
This is an important point since the differentiation between deep and
shallow samples is discussed later on.
L120: The information about the mean shallow and deep depth (L194/195)
should be given here.
L127: LOI is a rather crude measure of organic content. Since the study
focus on sediment organic matter content, why was there no CNS analysis
performed?
L151: Remove the complete line.
L152: remove “using a K-B style sediment corer”.
L162: Shift this sentence to line 181. The principle of the dating method
used according to Appleby and Oldfield should be explained. The vertical Pb
profiles look very different between the 3 lakes – I wonder how you get
accumulation rates from the different profile shapes. Also it is not clear
why radon was measured.
L168: Taking the average of two replicates is statistically problematic. How
big were the differences between the replicates. Maybe the range should be
given.
L181: It is not clear to me how the sedimentation rate was obtained.
L193-202. Why did the authors not show the complete LOI profiles from the
lake. The interpretation of the profile form (as exemplified in Fig.5) might
reveal much better information than just comparing surface sediment with
mean sediment.
L199: I do not understand this.
L.204: What is “W=144”?
L204/205: Maybe exchange “Due to the lack of suitable ….” By “
Because 11 lakes were too shallow to obtain a “deep” sample …”.  In
the methods section is stated that 22 lakes were sampled. Thus, 11 lakes
should be 50% (not 42%).
L206-209: What is the meaning of “variation”  here. Did you compare
standard deviations (ANOVA) or do you mean just organic matter content? In
the latter case remove “Variation in”.
L212: The bulk density of 0.008 is very low. Even if it´s given in g-dry
weight per ml the value is very low. It must be ± pure water. How did you
define the sediment surface in that case?
L213: shift to methods section.
L217-219: Since the depth of the shallow sample was determined
operationally, this relationship cannot be interpreted with respect to
light-sediment relations.
L221: I do not understand
L225: Oxygen in lakes is extremely variable. Thus, it does not make sense to
correlate the sediment characteristics with a single oxygen analysis
L227: No wonder knowing if the depth if the shallow sample was defined
operationally.
L227: Was Secchi depths measured?
L232-238: The paragraph is quite redundant to Table 3. Thus the text can be
shortened here or the table omitted.
L249-251: This is quite trivial.
L255-259: Maybe shift to the results section.
L263-271: Isn´t it very unprobable that the change in sedimentation exactly
compensate the change in mineralization.
L275: But you should give at least a possible explanation
L301: How deep was the photic zone in each lake? This information can be
added to the Tables 1 and 2. The lakes were quite shallow. Thus, was there
an aphotic zone at all.
L330: Transparency changes with season and the actual state of the plankton
community. Thus, interpretation of a single transparency value is difficult.
L343-344: I do not understand.
L358: write “Although organic matter produced by benthic primary
production…”


Review
Reviewer B
2012-10-29 03:27 PM

For author and editor
	
Subject: Patterns in the sediment organic matter content of arctic lakes
Review, FALFortino et al. Patterns in the sediment organic matter content of
arctic lakes.


This study asks actual questions regarding the factors that influencing the
storage of organic matter in arctic lake sediment. Pending on the sampling
strategy, the use of 210Pb is adequate for the detection of the sediment
age, and for the estimation of sedimentation rates. In addition, arctic
lakes are relatively young. They are located in a very fast changing
environment and therefor suitable for investigations highlighting carbon
turnover questions under the global change problematic.

However, the presentation of the manuscript is not of an acceptable
standard. The title, the abstract and the Keywords does not reflect the main
points of this study. The introduction does not reflect a satisfactory
review of the actual literature, many important methodological details and
explanations are missed out, and the line of arguments in the discussion
chapter requires extensive correction. In addition, I missed the figures.
The results of the study are only useable for a descriptive manuscript.
There were no biological/ecological investigations done with the upper
sediment layer. It is therefore not appropriate to discuss the findings in a
context of benthic primary production or mineralization. The authors are not
able to give information about the role of biofilms, macrophytes, microbial
turnover studies, oxygen consumption, etc..  All these factors are very
important in the aquatic carbon turnover.

I suggest that the authors should concentrate on making clear what the main,
novel finding of their study is.

Comments

L1                            change the title

L19-40                   The abstract does not reflect the text. What are
your hypotheses? There is no common thread; give the sampling time span,
also the seasons; the abstract need more methodical details, more
results/main findings, and less suggestions;

L42                         keywords should reflect the study

L44-46                   This statement has nothing to do with your study.

Introduction       There is no common thread. Please highlight at each
chapter what is actually missing and why is your research important! Give
the actual literature. Correct the references (in the whole manuscript; c.p.
L66-67, L74,…). Give some information about the nature of arctic lakes,
the role of macrophytes, plankton, biofilms, algae blooms in eutrophic lakes
and Secchi depth. Where are the hypotheses? What was the intention of your
study?

Material and Methods

                                How were the lakes selected?

Give a table with informations about previous studies on the investigated
lakes, including water chemical parameter (C, N, P, Fe, DOC, pH, cond.,
turbidity, etc.)

                                Give the exact sampling dates (for example:
21th January 2007, 12am) and a detailed description of your sampling
procedure.

Please give/describe the uncertainties associated with all your
measurements.

98                           24 hours

111-112                describe the K-B style gravity corer

115-117                please indicate how you have found the deepest and
shallowest point in the lake.

125-126                what means “all sediments” (1 cm or the whole
core)? Why have you used 40-60 °C for some samples and 105°C for the
others? Are the results comparable, especially in the context of the dry
bulk density calculation?

129-130                give the equation.

137-139                is PPFD the same as PAR (photosynthetically active
radiation)? Was it a spherical sensor? Give the unit.

143-144               Yulee, FL

                                Why PP filters and not the usual GFF?

144-146                How long was the storage time? Where there any
changes in the DOC concentration during storage?

147                         The detection of 210Pb and 226Ra/The estimation
of the accumulation rate

148-163                Why have you detected 226Ra? Give the equation for
the calculation of the accumulation rate.

165-172                normal distribution tests?

175                         residual analysis?  

191                         2009).

Results

192-247                Where are the figures? Please note that I can’t
give a full review without a comparison with the figures/data.

                                Some hints: What is W, Nid, Nsd, Why R and
not R²? Please take into account that phototrophic biofilms have generally
more ash fresh dry weight than heterotrophic have. Have you studied any
parameter like biofilms, plankton, humic substances, iron, sediment oxygen
consumption, pH? The light intensity at the water surface changes with
daytime and season. What is with temperature?

Discussion           What about POC?

279                         How have you cut the gyttja and dy cores in 1 cm
thin layers without freezing? Also the wide range of bulk densities (L283)
should make the comparability of this thin sediment layers very difficult.
Describe this in the method chapter.

281-284                Why?

285-366                Lakes with gyttja are normaly eutroph ore
hyper-eutroph (shallow lakes, ponds). Gyttja originates when microbiological
mineralization is lower than the input of organic matter, coming from
autochthonous (macrophytes, plankton, biofilms, fungi) or allochthonous
sources. But it could also originate under anoxic conditions or if the
warmer seasons are not long enough. Have you any data that could highlight
these points?

                                Is it possible to give a carbon balance?
Where is the discussion of the 210Pb and 226Ra data? What about temperature
increase, global change, …?            

298-300                you haven`t measure the irradiance with depth, or the
turbidity, or nutrients. What is the meaning of this statement? And was deep
sometimes not shallow? How have you differ between euphotic and photic? Are
there any measured data? In addition, temperature is a very important
environmental factor in arctic environments (seasonality). Is there any
correlation?

303-311                I would ask you to think carefully about whether a
data classification in shallow and deep is appropriate. It might be easier
for you to give only the mean depths and classify your date in deep lakes
and shallow lakes or in clear water lakes and turbid lakes.

309-311                give also the literature that shows the role of
phytoplankton and macrophytes in this context.

322-323                such a manipulated lake should be excluded of your
data set.

325-327                what do you mean?

336-337                that is an example where you should discuss rather
based on your data.

337-346                The colored part of dissolved organic substances
(humic like substances), Fe and turbidity could affect the transparency of
lakes. DOC not! That’s why you can’t find a correlation.

365-366               this isn’t a logically conclusion drawn from your
showing results.

Tables                   show the standard deviations, indicate all used
abbreviations, I would suggest to give table 1 as a figure.

Literature            there are some mistakes, like L477 ”Duarte”.
________________________________________________________________________
Fundamental and Applied Limnology
https://www.schweizerbart.de/submit/fal/index.php/fal

